Ten Principles of Economics
Abstract:Economics is basically the study of using the scarce resources wisely. The behavior of economy reflects the behavior of  individuals  and  so  of  the  society  who  make  the  economy.  Households  and  society  have  much  in  common.  They have to make many decisions. Both the household and society have to allocate their scarce resources among various purposes.  Scarcity,  various  choices  have  to  be  made  between  alternatives.  A  society  too  cannot  produce  all  the goods  and  services,  people  wish  to  have.  Economics is  the  study  of  how  society  uses  scarce  resources  to  produce and  distribute  valuable  commodities  among  the  people.  The  essence  of  economics  is  to  acknowledge  the  reality  of scarcity of resources and then to organize the society to achieve the most efficient use of resources. Economics is a very  important  discipline.    Unless  one  understands the  basic  principles  of  economics,  it  would  not  be possible  to design  relevant  economic  policies.  If  the  economic policies  are  wrong,  people  can  be  in  serious  trouble.  It  is  then quite important that we understand the basic principles of economics very well, in order to be able to design proper economic policy.  
Introduction: N.Gregory Mankiw divides ten principles of economics into three groups.  1. Principles concerning how people make decisions 2. Principles concerning how people interact with each other 3. Principles concerning the forces and trends that affect how the economy as a whole works.  The  first  four  principles  deal  with  individual  decision  making.  The  first  principle  explains  how people  face  trade-offs  in  their  lives.  Because  people  face  trade-offs,  making  decisions  requires comparing the costs and benefits of alternative courses of action. This is explained in the second principle  of  economics.  However,  whatever  decisions  are  made  in  life,  are  not  really  easy  to make.  According  to  the  third  principle,  a  rational individual  thinks  at  the  margin.  People  make decisions  by  comparing  costs  and  benefits,  and  therefore,  their  behavior  may  change  when  the costs  or  benefits  change.  Thus,  people  respond  in  incentives  and  this  is  explained  in  the  fourth principle  of  economics.  The  first  four  principles  inform  how  individuals  make  decisions  while the next three principles inform that many of the decisions affect not only themselves but other people as well. Principles five, six and seven explain how people interact with one another. The rest of the three principles are concerned with the working of the economy as a whole.  
Principle  One:  People  Face  Trade-Offs: The  first  principle  of  economics  states  that  peopleface trade-offs. A technique of reducing or forgoing one or more desirable outcomes in exchange for  increasing  or  obtaining  other  desirable  outcomes  in  order  to  maximize  the  total  return  or effectiveness  under  given  circumstances  is  termed  as  trade-offs.  When  someone  sacrifices  one thing  for  the  other  that  is  called  a  trade-off.  There  are  limited  goods  and  services  available  to 
people  for  consumption.  But,  the  needs  of  people  are  endless.  Thus,  there  is  scarcity  of  goods and services that fail to satisfy people’s needs. Therefore, people have to make decision on how to use these limited resources and distribute them among different people.  This  is  an  important  fact  of  life  for  an  economist.  If  you  decide  to  go  and  watch  a  movie  with your friends, you are losing out on the time that you would have spent otherwise. If you decide to buy a new cell phone, then you have to sacrifice on buying a new pair of shoes. If you plant one variety  of  rice  in  your  field,  you  must  forego  the chance  of  planting  another.    The  fact  that  we have to give up one thing in order to have another is referred to as trade-offs in economics. We face trade-offs because our resources are limited. Consider  a  student,  who  decides  to  study  economics for  one  hour;  he  has  to  give  up  one  hour studying  another  subject.  People  face  different  kinds  of  trade-offs  while  taking  decisions.  The same  is  true  with  families  and  societies.  When  the family  decides  to  spend  one  rupee  on something,  they  will  have  one  rupee  less  to  spend  on  something  else.  Societies  consist  of individuals and families. Thus, societies too face different kinds of trade-offs. For instance, if a country spends more on defense, it will have less to spend on infrastructure. Another important trade-offs is between a clean environment and a high level of income.  Principle  Two:  Opportunity  Cost  Affect  Decision  Making: The  cost  of  an  alternative  that must  be  foregone  to  select  another  alternative.  It is  the  benefit  that  one  would  receive  on selecting another alternative option. Opportunity costs affect decisions. We have seen that there are  trade-offs  do  doing  something.  Doing  one  thing precludes  doing  something  else.  Therefore, when  we  do  one  activity,  we  forego  the  chance  of  doing  the  second  activity.  In  other  words, when  we  do  something,  we  pay  a  cost,  which  is  the  cost  of  not  being  able  to  do  the  next  best thing.  This  cost  has  a  name  in  Economics.  It  is  referred  to  as  “Opportunity  cost”.  We  pay  this cost for the same reason that trade-offs exist: limited resources at the disposal of the individual. The opportunity cost of playing football today evening is perhaps the foregoing of the chance to play cricket. When we eat an ice-cream, we forego the chance of using that money for something else. The enjoyment lost because we could not spend our money on our next preferred alternative is the opportunity cost of eating the ice-cream. Obviously, we would spend the money on eating the ice-cream only if the opportunity cost of eating the ice-cream were not much higher than the enjoyment one would have from eating the ice-cream.
Consider  making  decision  on  whether  to  go  to  college  or  not.  If  going  college  is  the  decision made, the benefit he gets from this decision is the intellectual enrichment and a lifetime of better job  opportunities.  Now  these  benefits  must  be  compared  with  the  cost  the  student  incurs.  This can be describe in terms of the money spend on tuitions, books, room and board. Still, this total cost does not truly represent what the student gives up to spend a year in college. Opportunity  cost  is  the  cash  flows  prevented  by  taking  one  course  of  action  instead  of  another. For  instance,  the  opportunity  cost  of  the  services and  capital  of  the  entrepreneur  is  the  returns 
which  the  entrepreneur  could  have  earned  in  an  alternative  use  of  his  services  and  capital.  The opportunity cost of a decision is the value of the best available alternative foregone. If alternativeuses are many, then the opportunity cost is equal to the earnigs in the next best alternative. The opportunity cost applies to all situations where a thing can have alternative uses. In the absence of any alternative use, the opportunity cost is zero. Principle  Three:  Rational  People  Think  at  the  Margin: The  third  principle  of  economics states  that  rational  people  think  at  the  margin.  Marginal  benefit  is  the  additional  satisfaction  or utility that a person receives from consuming an additional unit of a goods or service. A person’s marginal benefit is the maximum amount he is willing to pay to consume that additional unit of a goods or service. Economists normally assume the people  are  rational. Rational people do their best  to  achieve  the  best  from  the  given  opportunities.  We  will  see  firms  deciding  about  how many  workers  to  be  hired  and  how  much  product  to  be  produced  and  sold  to  maximize  profits. Similarly,  consumers  deciding  about  which  bundle  of  goods  and  services  to  be  bought  to maximize satisfaction subject to their income and prices of goods and services.
The word marginal means additional. When you buy a burger, it meets your hunger. But, another additional burger may not. So, if you think at the margin, you are thinking about what the next or additional  action  means  for  you.  An  individual  can make  better  decisions  by  thinking  at  the margin.  When a student faces examination period, he has not to make decision whether to skip the exams of  keep  studying  all  the  day,  but  to  decide  whether  to  spend  an  extra  hour  to  review  the  notes instead  of  going  to  play  for  an  hour.  In  many  situations,  people  make  the  best  decisions  by thinking at the margin. Suppose  the  additional  revenue  that  I  am  going  to  get  from  producing  one  more  cricket  ball  is greater than the cost of producing the extra ball. Let us say an additional cricket ball sells for Rs.50  while  it  costs  only  Rs.  20  to  produce  the  additional  ball.  Clearly,  a  rational  producer  will decide to produce the ball because a profit of Rs.30 is to be made by doing so. On the other hand, if the price of cricket balls falls to rs.15 while the cost of producing it remains rs.20, it will notmake sense to produce the ball since the cost of making an additional ball exceeds the revenue to be earned from it. The cost of producing the extra ball is called marginal cost while the revenue obtained  from  selling  an  extra  ball  is  called  marginal  revenue.    If  marginal  revenue  exceeds marginal cost, it obviously makes sense to produce the extra ball. If the marginal revenue is less than marginal cost, it will not pay to produce the extra ball. This principle works in all walks of life.
Principle  Four:  People  Respond  to  Incentives: The  fourth  principle  of  economics  states  that people respond to incentives. An incentive is something that motivates an individual to perform an  action.  Incentives  can  be  in  the  form  of  money, gifts,  discounts,  etc.  rational  people,  who make  decision  by  comparing  cost  and  benefits,  respond  to  incentives.  Incentives  play  a  very
important  role  in  decision  making.  People  make  rational  decisions  be  comparing  the  marginal cost  and  marginal  benefits.  Therefore,  if  the  marginal  cost  and  marginal  benefits  change,  their behaviors  change.  This  indicates  that  people  respond  to  incentives.  When  price  of  apple increases, people decide to eat more bananas and fewer apples to save the cost of buying apples.  Incentives  are  very  important  determinants  of  how  people  will  behave  in  given  situations. Farmers  toil  hard  in  the  fields  because  they  hope  that  their  crop  can  be  sold  profitably.  If  a farmer  did  not  see  that  hope,  he  would  not  work  very  hard.  Nearly  everybody  responds  to incentives,  even  those  who  are  in  the  most  unfortunate  situation.  Prisoners  of  concentration camps sometimes chose to serve in the households of their Nazi masters because they hoped that this would give them a better chance of survival. Principle  Five:  Trade  Can  Make  Everyone  Better  Off:The  words  ‘exchange’  and  ‘trade’ refer to the same activity. Adam Smith pointed to the basic propensity of humans to “truck and barter”. Exchanging something that you have a lot of with something that you utterly lack makes you  better  off.  People  who  have  one  thing  and  want a  different  thing  can  exchange  or  trade  it voluntarily  with  each  other.  Trade  can  make  everyone  better  off.  When  people  trade  with  each other,  they  get  an  opportunity  to  buy  a  variety  of goods  and  services.  Trade  between  two countries can make each country better off. Similarly, families and people gain from their ability to trade with others. Trade allows each person to specialize in the activities he or she does best whether it is farming, carpentry, home building and so on. By trading or exchanging with others, people  can  buy  a  greater  variety  of  goods  and  services  at  lower  cost.  Similarly,  countries  can benefit  from  the  ability  to  trade  or  exchange  with one  another.  Trade  allows  countries  to specialize in what they do best and enjoy a large variety of goods and services.
Motorola (US) and Samsung (S. korea) produce the same kind of products of Smart phones, sony (Japan) and HCL (India) produce the same kind of products of laptops, Maruti (India) and Honda (Japan)  produce  the  same  kind  of  SUV  products  of  automobiles.  However,  trading  between different  countries  is  not  like  a  competition.  Rather,  trading  between  two  countries  make  each country  a  better  off.  Trade  allows  countries  to  specialize  in  what  they  do  best  and  to  enjoy  a greater  variety  of  goods  and  services.  Thus,  every participant  gets  benefited  in  the  trading  or simply called exchange. Principle  Six:  Market  are  Usually  a  Good  Way  to  Organize  Economic  Activity: The  sixth principle of economics states that markets are usually a good way to organize economic activity. The  organization  of  economic  activities  in  an  economy  will  depend  on  the  economic  system prevailing  in  a  economy.  An  economic  system  is  composed  of  people,  institution  and  their relationships  to  resources.  It  deals  with  the  production,  distribution  and  consumption  of  goods and  services  in  a  particular  society.  There  are  three  types  of  economic  systems,  namely; Command  economy,  Market  economy  and  Mixed  economy. In  a  market  economy,  economic activities  are  directed  through  price  mechanism.  Price  mechanism  is  the  system  in  a  market economy  whereby  changes  in  price  in  response  to  changes  in  demand  and  supply  bring  about 
equality  between  demands  and  supply.  Market  has  a  power  of  resource  allocation.  Markets facilitate  exchange.  A  market  is  a  mechanism  through  which  buyers  and  sellers  can  voluntarily carry out transactions.  A variety of goods and services are exchanged on markets.  Market is a mechanism  through  which  buyers  and  sellers  interact  to  set  prices  and  exchange  goods  and services.  According  to  Adam  Smith,  households  and  firms  interacting  in  markets  act  as  if  they are guided by an ‘invisible hand’ that leads them to desirable market outcomes. Principle  Seven:  Government  can  Sometimes  Improve  Market  Outcomes: The  seventh principle  of  economics  states  that  government  can  sometimes  improve  market  outcomes.  The markets   do   not   achieve   maximum   efficiency   in   the   allocation   of   scarce   resources   and governments feel it necessary to intervene to rectify this and other problems of the market. The conditions  required  for  markets  to  perform  their  allocative  and  creative  functions  in  an  optimal manner  are  not  likely  to  be  satisfied  in  any  economy.  The  important  problems  of  a  market economy  are;  domination  by  few,  removes  incentive  to  be  efficient,  unequal  distribution, externality, imperfect information, fail to provide public goods, macroeconomic instability etc.
Since there are many problems and failures of market  economy we need  government to correct market  failures  or  at  least  to  lessen  them.  The  government  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  the economic  development  of  a  country,  rather  as  an  agency  to  correct  market  failures.  The government  can  play  an  important  role  to  correct  market  failures  and  improve  economic efficiency.  According  to  R.A.Musgrave  and  P.B.Musgrave,  government  policy  is  needed  to guide, correct, and supplement the market mechanism in certain respects. The government has to play the roles of to correct market imperfections, to correct problems of imperfect information, to improve legal structure, to provide public goods and merit goods, to correct the problems arising from  externalities,  to  correct  unequal  distribution  of  income  and  wealth,  to  improve  an institutional environment, to secure important social objectives, to provide social security and to guide the use of natural resources.
Principle Eight: a Country’s Standard of Living Depends on Its Ability to Produce Goods and  Services: The  eighth  principle  of  economics  states  that  standard  of  living  of  a  country depends  on  its  ability  to  produce  goods  and  services.  The  standard  of  living  in  a  country  at  a given  point  of  time  refers  to  the  quantity  of  goods  and  services  that  are  available  per  person  in that country at that time. So, in effect, the standard of living in a country is the amount of food, medicines, education, clothes, housing, entertainment, infrastructure and other goods, health care and services that are available to an average citizen of that country.  Thus, the standard of living in  a  country  at  a  point  of  time  (normally  a  year)  depends  upon  two  things  a)  How  much  is produced in the country at that point of time b) The number of people in the country at that point of  time.  Two  things  should  be  noted  about  the  standard  of  living.  Firstly,  it  is  dynamic,  rather than static. That is, the standard of living in a country can improve or deteriorate. Countries like China  and  India  have  had  significant  improvements  in  their  standards  of  living  over  the  years. This  has  happened  because  these  countries  have  been  producing  goods  and  services  at  a  faster 
rate  than  the  rate  at  which  their  population  is  increasing.  It  is  very  clear  that  the  standard  of living of people around the world is not same. Standard of living depends on the earning of the individuals. If a country increases its productivity, the standard of living of the citizens increasesaccordingly  and  to  increase  the  productivity,  various  policies  are  required  to  be  made  by  the government. Principle  Nine:  Prices  Rise  When  the  Government  Prints  too  Much  Money: The  principle ninth  of  economics  states  that  price  rises  when  the  government  prints  too  much  money.  A sustained  rise  in  money  supply  in  a  country  is  likely  to  result  in  rise  in  prices.  The  relation between  quantity  of  money  and  inflation  can  be  explained  by  the  quantity  theory  of  money. According  Milton  Friedman,  “inflation  is  always  and  everywhere  a  monetary  phenomenon.” When the price level rises, people have to pay more for the same amount of goods and services they buy. On the other hand, price level is also a measure of the value of money. A rise in price level  means  a  lower  value  of  money  because  each  rupee  in  your  wallet  now  buys  a  smaller quantity of goods and services.
Principle Ten: Society Faces a Short-Run Trade off Between Inflation and Unemployment: The tenth principle of economics states that society faces a short-run trade-off between inflation and  unemployment.  Increase  in  wages  in  one  of  the  important  factors  responsible  for  inflation. A.W.Phillips, the British economist conducted a careful study of the data of more than a century pertaining to money wages, inflation and unemployment in the United Kingdom. His studies led to the conclusion that wages tend to raise when unemployment was low and vise-versa. The rise in  wages  increases  costs  which  in  turn  lead  to  rise  in  prices.  From,  Philips  analyzed  the  short term relationship between unemployment and inflation. Inflation-unemployment trade-off refers to  a  situation  where  increased  employment  is  accompanied  by  increased  inflation,  while  lower inflation is accompanied by lower employment growth. You cannot have a low level of inflation and a high level of employment simultaneously. Policy makers have to make a choice of having one  (either  low  inflation  or  high  employment)  at  the  cost  of  another  desirable  situation  (high unemployment or high inflation rate). 