Economic history into the perspective of economic thought and historiography: Between the Symplegades
ABSTRACT The relation between economic theory and history, as is crystallised in the history of economic thought, deter-mined  the  evolution  of  economic  history  proper.  The  twin  events  of  the  Marginalist  Revolution  and  the  Methodenstreit were crucial in exiling history from economic theory. Moreover, the dominance of the narrative historiographical paradigm in historiography, till the first decades of the twentieth century, determined the absence of theory from economic history. This twofold hiatus is decisive in the short history of economic his-tory. This paper attempts to delineate this gap by showing that an organic symphysis between economic the-ory and history is indispensable in the understanding economic phenomena.
IntroductionSocial sciences do not exhibit the robustness of the physical (or positive) sciences since the object social scientists investi-gate, the wide spectrum of social organisation, is far too com-plex and intricate, and cannot be limited to physical or chem-ical experiments. This is partly what lies behind the excessive segregation  between  social  sciences.  Each  social  science,  through its dominant scientific paradigm, and the subsequent development of its epistemic tools, attempts to represent its theoretical  schemas  as  “rules  of  thumb”.  Thus,  each  social  science is in a sense an “imperialist” science since it attempts to make its inferences appear as universal concerning human behaviour.  Having  said  this,  the  relations  between  different  social sciences are varied and multifarious.More  specifically,  the  relations  between  economic  theory  and historiography, the parent disciplines of economic history, exhibit an unremitting fluctuation1. The relationship between economic theory and history has been variegated and dynam-ic. Depending on the way its practitioners view the epistemo-logical status of economic history, the latter shifts from being either nearer to economic theory, as with the “new”, “newer” and “newest” versions of economic history, or closer to histo-riography,  as  with  the  British  historical  school  and  the  early  reformist tradition in economic history2. Although  the  professionalisation  of  economic  history  did  not  start  until  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century,  its  very  essence  —as  the  systematic  examination  of  economic  past—  finds  its  early  predecessors  in  the  first  decades  of  the  eighteenth century Britain, and more specifically in the writ-ings of the Scottish historical school. Besides, during the clas-sical  era  of  political  economy,  economic  history  had  not  ap-peared as a separate academic discipline. Till the late quarter of the nineteenth century, the historical element was organi-cally incorporated in the “hardcore” of many, but not all clas-sical political economy representatives including Adam Smith, Robert Malthus, John Stuart Mill, and Karl Marx. Till the 1870s political  economy  was  conceived  as  a  unified  social  science  embracing social, historical, and economic elements. After the Marginal revolution, and the Methodenstreit, economic history appears  as  a  separate  academic  “territory”  bridging  abstract  economic theory with the more narrative type of historiography,
which was dominant during the 19th century3. Its further consolidation  through  the  identification  of  its  distinctive  methods,  its  textbooks,  and  its  specialist  university  teachers  was  completed  during  the  period  1893-1927.  This  paper  at-tempts  to  delineate  the  relations  between  economic  theory  and history and how these were crystallised in the academic evolution of the economic history proper. This is done in four sections.  In  the  first  section,  we  attempt  to  sketch  out  the  ambiguous  nature  of  economic  history  as  is  crystallised  in  economic historians” views. In the second section, we present the  happy  symbiosis  between  economic  theory  and  history  during the classical era of the political economy, while in the third  we  illustrate  their  separation  in  the  post-marginalist  period. In the fourth section, we show how history became the Cinderella of (neoclassical) economic theory while in the fifth we comment how historiography contributed to the disjunc-tion of history from theory. Lastly, we offer our conclusions. 
1. Economic history: The mule of social sciences?Economic theory and history are fighting for the fatherhood of  economic  history  (Clapham,  1971  [1929],  p.  58).  The  rela-tionship between the two has been shifting and volatile, and can be considered as an unhappy marriage with an impossible divorce. There are several accounts of the content of economic history. According to Pollard ([1964] 1971, p. 291), economic his-tory  is  the  mule of  social  sciences.  In  a  similar  way  Coats  ([1966] 1971, pp. 331, 333) characterises economic history as a  “hybrid  discipline”  in  which  the  economic  historian  “is  tempted not only to pontificate on the nature and methods of economic  history  but  on  those  of  economics  and  history  as  well”. Truly, the economic historian knows that he cannot live off his own; he is cultivating a “hybrid”, planted in the fertile borderlands  between  Arts  and  Social  Sciences.  Similarly  for  Wallerstein (1991, p. 173), “It is a bit as though economic his-tory were an unwanted stepchild, a Cinderella in rags”. The situation is different in other kinds of history such as political  history,  social  history,  psychological  history,  etc.,  so  long as the corresponding social sciences in each case do not search for the precision and the generality that economics is reaching for. At the same time, however, no other social science (sociology,  political  science,  anthropology,  or  psychology)  is  related  as  congenially  with  history  as  economic  science.  As  Cole ([1967] 1971, p. 353) puts it, “the links between history and theory are very much closer in the analysis of economic
changes  than  they  are  in  some  other  branches  of  historical  study”.  In  other  words,  the  (typical)  economic  historian  is  caught up in a kind of “schizophrenia”, having a double face, like Janus: half an economist and half a historian4. In Hancock’s words ([1946] 1971, p. 146): “[the economic historian’s] per-plexing migrations between the two tribes of economists and historians have made his nature and destiny a matter for dis-pute”. Thereby, “the economic historian who attempts to es-cape from this inner conflict by writing history with a mini-mum  admixture  of  economics,  or  economics  with  a  thin  veneer  of  history,  is  simply  running  away  from  his  subject”  (Youngson, [1959] 1971, p. 222). Economic  history  is  the synthesis of two different, even opposing, academic traditions, that of economics and historiography. Historiography, a field with  archaic  roots,  has  a  “cosmopolitan”  air,  is  receptive  to  other  social  sciences,  and  characterised  by  a  wide,  “literary”  and artistic horizon. On the other hand, economic science as a separate field of study, on top of being a much younger disci-pline is much more rigid in-as-much-as it directs its epistemo-logical  schemes  towards  discerning  regularities  in  economic  processes. Economics attempts to formulate the general laws governing either the whole economy (as in classical political economy)  or  separate  enunciations  of  human  behaviour  as  with the microeconomics of neoclassical theory. This trend is vividly reflected in economists’ desire to produce science that resembles that of physics (Milonakis, 2017). The consequence of  this  desire,  as  exemplified  by  the  work  of  the  marginalist  troika,  and  mainly  Jevons  and  Walras  was  the  erection  of  a  “general theory” which would resemble in rigour the physical science theories (Drakopoulos, 1992, p. 153). Thus the dialec-tical  relation  between  (mainstream)  economic  theory  and  (narrative) historiography has produced a synthesis, economic history, the content of which is wobbly, hazy, and inexplicit.
Such an unstable synthesis has implied decisive (existential) consequences  for  the  economic  historian,  who,  according  to  Mathias  (1971,  p.  369),  “is  forever  a  historian  among  econo-mists; an economist among historians”.The unstable nature of such a synthesis can be partly attrib-uted to the marginal revolution and the subsequent transition from classical political economy to (neoclassical) economics. The result of this transition was a more abstract and fictitious economic theory having excised any social and historical ele-ments from the analysis of economic processes (Milonakis and Fine, 2009). Thereby, the initial suspicion with which neoclas-sical economists viewed history, is transformed into a rejection of it, before becoming one of its colonial victims through the cliometrics revolution of the 1950s and 1960s in the work of Conrad and Meyer, Fogel and North. This transition, which has been described by economists such as Field (1995), Hodgson (2001), Milonakis and Fine (2009), Fine and Milonakis (2009), was a process of a brutal encroachment of history; a descrip-tion that exhibits the arrogant and expansionary (imperialist)
character  of  neoclassical  economic  theory.  However,  in  con-trast to neoclassical economics, the relationship between eco-nomic theory and history has to be congenial as long as histo-ry constitutes the “intellectual frontier” of theory’s imperialism. In reality, the interrelationship between economics and histo-ry  involves  a  process  of  a  perpetual,  continuous,  and  active  dialogue and their organic symphysis could produce coherent interpretations of the economic past. But for economic theory to be historically relevant, the economist has to immerse his (abstract) theoretical schemes in “historical time”. At the same time,  the  (economic)  historian  needs  a  coherent  theoretical  scheme  to  clarify,  classify,  and  criticise  factual  data.  Such  a  symphysis  will  make  possible  the  creation  of  a  theoretical,  realist, and critical perception of historical reality, namely an histoire raisonnée which is incompatible with the (neoclassical) logic of mainstream economics.
2.   The classical period of political economy: History and theory manus in maniBefore  the  emergence  of  economic  history  as  a  separate  discipline history had been the primary focus of the Scottish historical school and played an important role in the econom-ic theorising of the majority of classical political economists. Economists such as Smith, Malthus, and J. S. Mill by showing great  concern  for  the  historical  nature  of  production  and  (mainly) of distribution have used the historical element as a crucial  ingredient  in  their  economic  theorising6.  A  similar,  if  higher, symphysis —a chemical mixture as Schumpeter (cited in Milonakis and Fine, 2009, p. 44) describes it— of theory and history has also been promoted by Karl Marx’s extensive work which reveals congenial connections between theoretical (eco-nomic) reasoning and concrete historical investigation. Even  though  the  linkages  between  economic  theory  and  history attained their apogee in classical political economy and Marx  the  deeper  roots  of  economic  history  are  generally  thought  to  reach  back  to  the  Scottish  historical  school.  This  School  includes  the  likes  of  David  Hume,  Sir  James  Stuart,  Adam Ferguson, William Robertson, John Millar, and, of course, Adam Smith, providing “the first British signposts of the eco-nomic  past  as  an  essential  element  in  the  understanding  of  society”  (Coleman  1987,  p.  5).  The  Scottish  historical  school  established, on an epistemological level, one of the great ori-entations of the Enlightenment: the relationship between pro-cesses  of  civilization  (historically  determined)  and  human  emancipation stressing the important role of history in delineating
economic phenomena7. The aforementioned represent-atives of the Scottish historical school perceive the economic past in holistic and materialistic terms. It is not accidental that Hume, one of the most prominent Scottish thinkers, is “won-dering”: “Can we expect that a government will be well mod-eled by a people who know not how to make a spinning-wheel or to employ a loom to advantage?”, given that “the growth of commerce and industry [is] [...] a crucial element in the ad-vance of civilization” (cited in Coleman, 1987, p. 8). Likewise, for Smith ([1776] 1976, p. 324), the leader of both the Scottish historical school and British (classical) political economy, “the desire of bettering our condition is with us from the womb to the grave” and, what is more, “the uniform, constant and un-interrupted  effort  of  every  man  to  better  his  condition,  the  principle  from  which  public  and  national,  as  well  as  private  opulence is originally derived is frequently powerful enough to maintain the natural progress of things towards improve-ment, in spite both of the extravagance of government and of the  greatest  errors  of  administration”.  However  Hume’s  and  Smith’s  theoretical  histories  were  different.  In  particular,  Smith,  under  Newton’s  influence,  believed  that  society  and  economy  function  as  “machines”  and  as  such  he  searched  those unobserved causes that bring about observed historical events. Myers (1975, p. 295) believes that Smith is like an en-lightened  mechanic  who  attempts  to  discover  those  general  principles  that  function  as  a  machine’s  modus  operatii.  In  Smith’s political economy this propensity is evidenced in his view  that  human  instincts,  such  as  the  desire  of  self-better-ment, do not change along history. Thus the Smithian theory of  history  should  be  considered  as  objective  in  epistemic  terms. On the other hand Hume’s experimental method (Dem-eter,  2016)  and  his  dynamic  approach  of  social  phenomena  (Sabl,  2012)  imply  the  searching  for  regularities  through  a 
more subjective way. Evidently, Smith’s and Hume’s difference paved  the  way  for  the  difference  between  historical  schools  and the theoretical schools of economic thought8. The  same  historical  attitude  appears  in  Millar,  Ferguson,  and Robertson. Their materialistic perception of the econom-ic past pushed them to search for regularities in the history of  economic  processes.  For  them,  “the  process  of  social  change exhibits certain uniformities and regularities and the great task is to explain these, in terms of laws which lie behind social development” (Meek, 1971, p. 9). Their main (histori-cal) law has been the “theory of stages”. For Scottish thinkers, the society is evolving through four discernible stages, each of which is characterised by its own “mode of subsistence”: hunting, pasturage, farming, and commerce (ibid., p. 10; Skin-ner,  1965,  pp.  7-8;  Pascal,  1938).  Their  materialistic  under-standing of economic history, together with an explicit the-ory of economic development (stages theory), rendered them the  “progenitors  of  what  was  much  later  to  be  called  “eco-nomic history”, a term unknown to the eighteenth century” (Coleman, 1987, p. 5). The rich and multilayered legacy of the Scottish historical school  was  replanted  by  its  leader  in  a  newfangled  but  ex-tremely  fertile  ground  that  of  classical  political  economy.  Smith,  who  connects  the  Scottish  historical  school  with  the  classical  school  of  political  economy,  authored  in  1776  the 
foundation stone of the modern economic science, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776). The Wealth of Nations exhibits an intense, organic, and congenial synthesis  of  economic  theory  and  history  as  their  dialogue  approaches  its  apogee  by  demonstrating  the  “cruciality”  of  both in the analysis of economic processes. The historical ele-ment was incorporated in Smith’s central concerns regarding production and distribution (Manioudis and Milonakis, 2020). According to Smith, nations are characterised by progressive trends; and progress is solely reversed through state’s activity and merchants’ actions. These (periodic) regressions are events and  trends  which  belong  to  the  realm  of  a  more  “narrative”  type of history, which, in turn, clashes with the more “philo-sophical (“theoretical” or “conjectural”) type of history which is the rule in The Wealth of Nations. Their dialectical relation-ship is apparent in Book IV, “For the Mercantile System”, where he points out that self-interest was historically conducive to the  “progress  of  opulence”,  via  the  operation  of  unforeseen  consequences, but that progress was periodically checked by the  actions  of  governments  and  businessman  (Smith,  [1776]  1976). In reconsidering Smith’s contribution in political econ-omy Unwin ([1908] 1971, p. 43) points out that it contains “the best piece of economic history that has yet been written”, and exhibits  “in  a  large  historical  field  the  gradual  emergence  of  those principles which Adam Smith had expounded in the two earlier books of his great treatise”.
Karl  Marx’s  materialist  conception  of  history  is  in  many  respects an epigone of the Smithian project. Despite his nar-row (pure) historical texts in which the linkage between the-ory and history is in many points weak, in his major work, Das Capital (1876),  Marx  used  history  as  an  integral  part  of  his  economic analysis. Fine and Filho ([2004] 2010, p. 7) acutely observe that Marx “famously summurises his account of the relationship between structures of production, social relations and  historical  change”.  Marx’s  organic  use  of  history  is  also  apparent in the “Prefaces” in two of his texts: the well-known Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859), and the 18th  Brumaire  of  Louis  Bonaparte  (1852).  A  simultaneous  ex-amination  of  these  “Prefaces”  vividly  exhibits  Marx’s  use  of  both kinds of history, namely the “philosophical” and the more “narrative”. In the Contribution to the Critique of Political Econ-omy his  usage  of  history  is  more  conjectural,  structural,  dy-namic, and holistic, but also more mechanistic and simplistic, based  on  the  abstract  concept  of  “the  mode  of  production”,  conceived as the dialectical interplay between productive forc-es  and  productive  relations.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, the use of “history” is more plu-ralistic  since  his  Promethean  perception  of  human  agency  provides the potential for an all-embracing transformation of the  socio-economic  environment.  Arguably,  there  is  no  con-tradiction  between  Marx’s  “generalised”  (conjectural)  and  “narrative”  use  of  history  contained  in  his  economic  theory.  Marx’s theoretical analysis is, as Milonakis and Fine (2009, p. 38) rightly note, historically specificsince his main analytical categories (value, surplus value, mode of production etc.) are perceived under purely historical terms. In Marx it is the the-oretical that is moving in parallel direction with the historical. Summurising, as Hobsbawm (1999, p. 208) puts it, “the mate-
rialist  conception  of  history  is  the  core  of  Marxism,  and  al-though everything in Marx’s writing is impregnated with his-tory,  he  himself  did  not  write  much  history  as  historians  understand  it  [i.e.  narrative  history]”.  In  Marx’s  manus the
linkage between economic theory and history was so lusty that it has enabled him to construct a “theory of history as a theo-ry of society”. Milonakis and Fine (2009, pp. 33-45) note that Marx has used the historical element in at least four discerni-ble ways. Initially, he used historical forms of argumentation in  his  epistemic  choices.  For  example  in  his  methodological  views,  the  movement  from  the  “abstract  to  the  concrete”  opened the pathways for history to become an integral feature of his analysis. Here history is used mostly theoretically and philosophically.  Second,  the  use  of  history  is  evident  in  his  epistemological schemes where the outlines of the development and decline of the modes of production accords history special importance. The presentation of the beginning, development, maturation and decline of modes of production is related to another use of history, namely narrative history. According to Marx, the object being studied is not static but in continuous movement. Thirdly, Marx’s has used his analytical categories in a sequential, if not in a historical way. It is no accident that in Capital he starts with the commodity and then goes on to analyse money and capital. His ontological premises contain an evident historical breath. As Milonakis and Fine (ibid., p. 40) put it, “This is exactly the sequence in which these categories appeared historically”. There are occasions where Marx’s use of history goes beyond his theoretical argumentations. In his discussion  of  primitive  accumulation,  for  example,  his  theo-retical reasoning is limited, permitting historical narrative to occupy  a  central  epistemological  place.  Lastly,  history  itself  becomes in all his writings the central object of analysis since his Darwinian view of society accords a special niche in change, and of course in history.
Robert  Malthus,  through  his  famous  Essays  on  Population(1798) and his Principles of Political Economy (1820), deserves a special place amongst the early progenitors of the study of economic and social past in Britain. Malthus dived into histor-ical evidence to compose his political economy. His extensive use of empirical data rendered him as one of the most prom-inent partisans of induction, as opposed to deduction, the most influential  adherent  of  which  was  his  (close)  friend  Ricardo.  The triumph of Ricardian economics, in the early 1830s, altered the nature and evolution of economic science which after this began to be related more to logic and deduction from abstract principles, rather than that to the empirical and historical in-vestigation (Harte, 1971: xiii). However, Ricardo’s victory was total. From Ricardo onwards, economic theory has gained more in  simplicity,  robustness,  and  elegance,  but  at  the  cost  of  its  living linkages with factual data and history.
Between the classical political economy and neoclassical economics stands the figure of John Stuart Mill whose work reintroduced the use of historical evidence in economic the-orising. Mill through his Principles of Political Economy (1848) and his celebrated text of empiricist philosophy A System of Logic (1843)  attempted  to  save  Ricardo’s  abstract  principles  by reference to historical evidence. As Mill ([1843] 1981, pp. 896-897) puts it, “the ground of confidence in any concrete deductive science is not the a priori reasoning itself, but the accordance  between  its  results  and  those  of  observation  a posteriori”.  Nonetheless,  despite  his  statements  about  the  usefulness of empirical evidence (and history) for grounding theory, in reality, his political economy had remained mainly in production’s issues deductive and abstract. However, Mill’s use  of  history  had  been  both  thorough  and  interesting.  His  texts had reintroduced the importance of history in the political
economy and had influenced the fate of economic the-ory. Mill, by being less dogmatic than Ricardo, was twofold influential in the history of economic thought. One the one hand, through his use of a priori abstract reasoning he pre-pared  the  ground  for  the  emergence  of  neoclassical  ortho-doxy. Especially the younger Mill, of the Essays on Some Un-settled  Questions  of  Political  Economy  (1844),  adopted  an  a-aprioristic  account  of  economic  phenomena  which,  in  methodological terms, reintroduced the Cartesian epistemol-ogy in political economy regarding the relationship between the Self and the social world. On the other hand, through the “legalisation” of induction, and the extensive elaboration of history, he provided the essential sperms for the subsequent appearance  of  Irish  (and  English)  Historicism  (Manioudis,  2020). As Koot (1987, p. 10) points out, “Indeed, the econom-ic views of Mill offered a significant opening for the heretical views  of  several  of  the  historical  economists”.  It  was  with  Mill’s Principles that the circle of classical political economy was closed, other than Marx’s rehabilitation, exposing on the way  the  epistemic  problems  of  a  non-integral  connection  between theory and history. As Hutchison (cited in Coleman, 1987, p. 37) has pointed out, “the integration of history with analysis  and  theory,  so  superbly  and  uniquely  achieved  in  Adam Smith’s work was shattered [...] Economic history was left largely to rebels and outsiders”.
3. From the separation of economic theory from history...The separation of economic theory form history was pro-moted by two parallel, but closely interrelated, incidences in the history of economic thought: the transition from political economy  to  economics  (through  the  marginal  revolution),  and  the  Methodenstreit,  the  battle  of  methods  between  the  marginalist Carl Menger and Gustav von Schmoller, the lead-er  of  the  German  historical  school.  The  result  of  the  Meth-odenstreit was  the  exclusive  use  of  the  abstract  deductive  method  by  mainstream  economics,  at  the  expense  of  the  inductive/historical method. This warfare led to the creation of two antithetic camps in economic philosophy and meth-odology. On the one hand was the neoclassical camp, whose main  purpose  was  to  turn  the  political  economy  into  the  science on a par with physics, and on the other was the camp of  the  German  historical  school  which  attempted  to  trans-form  the  political  economy  into  a  branch  of  historical  re-search. If the disjuncture between economic theory and his-tory was self-evident in neoclassicism, it is also transparent, if  in  the  opposite  direction,  in  German  Historismus.  Apart  from  Arthur’s  Spiethoff  Wirtschaftsstil,  German  historical  economists  from  Roscher  to  Schmoller  did  not  develop  a  coherent  theoretical  (epistemological)  scheme  to  promote  the open dialogue between theory and history. Their endeav-ours to form a “stages theory of economic development” were generic and they did not give any “mental unity to the chaos of scattered particulars with which the economic historian is concerned” (Sombart, 1929, p. 10). Though his criticism, Som-bart’s endevour, as Schmoller’s, starts from the idea of recon-ciling theory and history, but builds an unsatisfactory analyt-ical model both on an epistemological level and concerning the results he achieved. The failure of their epistemological
attempts to promote a dialogue between theory and history reflects the superficial character of their ontological premises which  were  related  to  a  lucid  Rankean phraseology9.  As  Milonakis (2006, p. 274) concludes, “contrary to Smith and Marx, the historical school found no common criteria to dif-ferentiate the various stages. They lacked a unifying theoret-ical principle such as Smith’s “mode of subsistence” or Marx’s “mode of production”. However, it should be noted that, some of German economists’ notions, such as Spiethoff’s theory of business cycles were used later by economists such as Schum-peter and Cassel. 
At the same time, on top of the Methodenstreit, the explo-sion of the marginal revolution –leading later on to the exces-sive “mathematisation” of economic theory– has led econom-ic science away from the historical (and social) framework of its  referrals  transforming  it  in  this  way  into  an  ahistorical,  abstract and simplistic theoretical corpus. The static character of neoclassical economic theory along with the extensive use of differential calculus has eliminated the dynamic content of (classical) political economy and has led theory off the tracks of  economic  dynamics  and  to  the  exclusion  of  the  historical  element  from  economic  reasoning  (Habbakuk,  1971,  p.  308).  According to Milonakis (2006, p. 271):The focus shifted away from dynamic processes of growth and distribution  at  the  macro  level,  to  static  equilibrium  analysis  of  price determination at the micro-level. Methodological holism gave way to methodological individualism, accompanied by a change in the subject matter of economic science, from investigation of the causes and distribution of wealth to the interrogation of the eco-nomic behaviour of individuals, especially the principle of (utility) maximisation.
Besides an influential role in the disjuncture of the histori-cal element from economic theorising is accorded to the Brit-ish historical school, the practitioners of which promoted the complete separation of the historical element from economic theory,  finally  leading  to  a  newfangled  academic  discipline,  economic  history.  William  Cunningham,  one  of  the  most  prominent historical economists, was influential in this pro-cess.  His  continuous  controversies  with  Alfred  Marshall  and  his  adoption  of  an  ultra-empiricist  stance  widened  the  dis-tance  between  historical  economics  and  economic  theory.  British  historical  economists  despite  some  scarce  contribu-tions,  such  as  the  relativity  of  economic  doctrines,  had  con-tributed to the total excision of the theoretical element from economic history carrying it nearer to historiography than to economics. Therefore, the separation of economic theory from history did not come solely from economic theory’s alienation from history but also through historical economists’ failure to formulate  a  synectical  theoretical  network.  In  their  scripta, empiricism is substituted for theoretical reasoning. Especially in Europe the legacy of the economic thought of the German historical school was transformed into applied economic pol-icy.  As  Cardozo  and  Psalidopoulos  (2016,  p.  XV)  put  it,  this 
“gave rise to the historical approach in economic reasoning, an approach related to German ‘Staatskunst’, the art of conduct-ing the business of the state”. At  the  same  time,  the  historical  element  was  expelled  from (neoclassical) economic theory as it did not fit the ab-stractness of neoclassical epistemic premises, being, accord-ing to Ashton’s aphorism, a stubborn and willful thing (Asht-on,  [1946]  1971,  p.  167).  Economic  historians  with  purely  neoclassical roots, despite their enunciations for the neces-sity of a connection between theory and history, they entire-ly  eschewed  theory  in  their  historical  writings  (Habakkuk,  1971, p. 307). Ad addendum, Clapham (1922, p. 305), despite his close bonds with both Marshall (being his student) and Pigou,  has  famously  characterised  the  (static)  neoclassical  tools  as  “empty  economic  boxes”.  In  his  celebrated  article,  Clapham notes that the tendency of (historical) facts to out-pace the breadth of theoretical schemas “impaired the final utility of the method of reasoning whereby theory preceded facts” (Kadish, 1989, p. 228). Clapham’s dissension with Pig-ou reflects the former’s resentment with how economic the-oreticians insisted on interpreting economic reality. In real-ity,  in  Clapham’s  manus,  the  linkage  between  economic  theory  and  history  was  weakened,  widening  the  epistemic  gulf  between  them.  Moreover,  Marshall  himself,  when  he  attempted to provide his contribution to (British) economic history, came up with his Industry and Trade (1919) where, however, he makes “little use of the theories worked out in his Principles, except possibly for the notion of “economies of massive production [and] one could read his account of the process  without  realizing  that  the  author  was  an  eminent  theorist” (p. 306). 
Generally,  Marshall,  despite  having  a  general  historical  sense, which is highlighted by some historians of economic thought, such as Hodgson (2001; 2009), but is rightly down-graded  by  others  Milonakis  and  Fine  (2009;  2012),  was  in-strumental in the process of the separation of economic his-tory from economic theory. Marshall had, according to Ashley (1891), rehabilitated Ricardo’s abstract economic epistemol-ogy.  His  contribution  to  the  exclusion  of  history  from  eco-nomic  theory  is  based  on  two  facts.  Firstly,  the  historical  references both in his theoretical (Principles of Economics) and in his historical (Industry and Trade) works are not based on prime sources and lead to accusations of “unsupported gen-eralisations”  (Koot,  1987,  p.  147).  Secondly,  with  the  estab-lishment of Cambridge Economics Tripos in 1903 he down-graded economic history’s role since he reserved half of the first two years and all of the final year for economic theory and left only one year for applied economics and economic history.  Even  the  economic  history  to  be  taught  was  to  be  primarily  that  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Thus,  economic  history  was  relegated  and  the  hiatus  between  history  and  economics was widened (ibid., p. 149; Kadish, 1989, p. 209; Tribe,  2000,  pp.  222,  248).  Through  the  meeting  of  these  parallel processes, economic science was led to a historical disruption; firstly, economic theory became ultra-deductive and  a-historical,  and  secondly,  the  excluded  historical  ele-ment has found its place in the newly formed academic dis-cipline of economic history which, as seen already, was clos-er to historiography.
The climax for the complete excision of the historical ele-ment from economic theory was accomplished through Rob-bins’ Essays on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science
(1932).  Robbins’  view,  that  economic  science  should  be  the  study of “human behavior as a relationship between ends and scarce resources which have alternative uses” pushed econom-ic theory further towards a transhistorical direction. The sim-plistic  relation  between  price/quantity  downgraded  the  role  of  historical  (and  social)  element  as  “the  buyers  and  sellers  could  be  combines,  individuals,  slaves,  Greeks,  Turks  or  Kalmucks; the time could be war, peace, this century, the last, or the next: the answer, and its significance, is the same in each case”  (Habakkuk,  1971,  p.  295).  The  result  of  this  process,  of  the  de-historisation  of  economics,  is  that  “economists  have  tended, especially in the post-1945 period, to look down upon economic  history  as  empirical,  descriptive,  atheoretical,  and  somewhat irrelevant” (Wallerstein, 1991, pp. 173-174).
Outside  economists’  decisive  contribution  to  the  engulf-ment  between  economic  theory  and  history,  influential  was  also the role of the economic historians. The reformist tradi-tion  in  economic  history,  whose  main  representatives  were  Tawney, Cole, and the Hammonds, systematised the epistem-ic motifs of British historical school and became something like the  youngest  version  of  British  economic  history.  Alongside  methodological holism and the reception of mostly social top-ics  —like  the  working  class’  condition  during  the  Industrial  Revolution—  the  reformist  tradition  adopted  from  their  pro-genitors the same repugnance to economic theory. Despite the use  of  some  truly  general  theoretical  schemas,  they  did  not  promote  any  (organic)  symphysis  between  economic  theory  and economic history. Tawney had scorned to economic the-ory, despite having a thorough command of its doctrines, while Hammonds’,  and  mainly  Barbara  Hammond’s,  ignorance  of  mathematics  was  profound  (Coleman,  1987,  p.  74).  Granted  this, in reformist economic historians’ hands, the linkage be-tween economic theory and history was minimised, widening the already wide chasm between them. Tawney for example, the leader of the reformist tradition, characterised economic theory’s  doctrines  as  vain,  questioning  the  very  existence  of  such a thing called economic science (Kadish, 1989, p. 242). In  contrast  to  this  process  of  intensifying  the  disjunction  between  (neoclassical)  economic  theory  and  history,  some  neutral economic historians attempted to redefine the reuni-fication between theory and history. Ashton entitled his inau-gural lecture at L.S.E. in 1946 the “Relation of Economic Histo-
ry  to  Economic  Theory”.  In  this  lecture,  he  pointed  out  that  both economic theorists and historians have to make mutual sidesteps.  Ashton’s  conciliatory  tone  did  not  actualize.  The  more formalism held sway in economic theorising, the more the reputation of economic history was relegated. Arrow and Debreu’s  proof  of  the  existence  of  a  (Walrasian)  competitive  equilibrium  in  1954  has  engulfed  the  importance  of  time  in  (pure)  economic  theorising  and  had  diminished,  not  to  say  exiled,  the  role  of  history  in  the  examination  of  economic  phenomena. This exile was the product of a dual process: the first was an absolute focusing on the concept of equilibrium –a focus that precludes any possibility of non-equilibrium or crisis. The second was the perception of the “end of history”, a construction which precludes any appearance of regressions as  long  as  “economic  progress  could  be  taken  so  much  for  granted that it would be superfluous to spend much time and effort enquiring into it” (Ashworth, [1958] 1971, p. 206). Eco-nomic theory focused on the static analysis given that issues of economic dynamics (and history) connected with the issues of  growth  and  development  are  considered  to  have  been
solved. For Coleman (1987, p. 36): “For the orthodox, “econom-ic history” had nothing positive to say. Recovery after the post-war depression and expansion into the triumphant mid-cen-tury  boom  seemed  to  make  the  merits  of  free  trade  and  laissez-faire self-evident, to justify the deductive approach, and to set the seal of approval on what had become the classical political economy”. In  general,  the  overall  trend  in  economic  history  was  “to  become empiricist in content and, as such, to be divorced from theory, especially economic theory” (Milonakis, 2006, p. 277). The British Methodendiskurs between Marshall and Cunning-ham,  the  subsequent  indifference  to  history  on  the  part  of  economic theorists, and the continuing hostility to economics on the part of the reformist historians, all contributed to the continuance  of  the  gulf  between  economic  theory  and  eco-nomic history (Coleman, 1987; Hodgson, 2001; Milonakis and Fine, 2009).
4.        ...  to  the  reunification  through  economics  imperialism:  Clio the muse of historyApart from the marginal revolution, a new point in the evo-lution of the relationships between economic theory and his-tory  occurred  between  the  late  1940s  and  mid-1950s.  This  period is characterised by the systematisation of econometrics and the widespread diffusion of both computing and mathe-matical tools. The use of the word analysis instead of theory, in Samuelson Foundations of Economic Analysis (1947), is indic-ative of the development of formalisation. The “hardcore” of economics  remained  neoclassical  –thanks  to  Arrow  and  De-breu’s (1954) paper –but their “protective belt” became more empirical since the statistical element entered into the econ-omists’ agenda.On  the  other  side,  there  emerged,  among  neoclassical  economists, a growing interest in issues of economic growth, especially  concerning  the  (newly)  developing  countries  in  Asia and Africa. Granted this, economists turned once again to the economic history of modern states to get fresh insights and  advice  for  economic  growth.  The  relationship  between  this new branch of economics (development economics) and economic history is described by Coats ([1966] 1971, p. 332) as follows:
It is often suggested that historians can shed light on the prob-lems  of  the  present  by  disclosing  the  secrets  of  the  past,  and  as  almost all of the underdeveloped countries are in a pre-industrial stage of development, and anxious to have an industrial revolution of their very own, an added stimulus has been given to the study of  the  first  or  “classic”  industrial  revolution  which  occurred  in  eighteenth-century England.This new drift in the evolution of economic thought has pro-duced a fundamental reversal in the relationship between eco-nomic theory and history rendering history the handmaiden (or the  Cinderella)  of  abstract  models  of  economic  growth.  The  “hardcore” of all (neoclassical) developmental models —such as Gerschenkron’s,  Domar/Harrod,  Leibenstian,  Rostonian,  and  a  whole series of others— is seated on the core premise of neo-classical economics, as the “science which studies human be-havior as a relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses”, and have shared the related neoclassical assumptions.  Inevitably  history  was  relegated  to  a  secondary  role, being the “protective belt” of the aforementioned neoclas-sical  “hardcore”.  Typical  examples  of  this  propensity  are  Kuznets’ and Rostow’s attempts to sketch out the way to eco-nomic growth by citing as Great Britain and the USA as models of  this  way.  Their  considerations  of  the  British  (1st  industrial  revolution) and American (2nd industrial revolution) experienc-es  promoted  a  one-way  relationship  between  (neoclassical)  economic  theory  and  history.  The  aforementioned  develop-ments have permitted economic history, through the extensive use  of  advanced  econometric  techniques,  the  guidance,  the  fitting, and even the distortion of historical evidence to adjust to  the  main  neoclassical  commands.  The  foundation  stone  of  these  fermentations  was  laid  in  the  famous  Massachusetts’  Conference in 1957 where the expansionist tendencies of (neo-classical) theory to history were institutionalised. In this Con-ference on “Research in Income and Wealth”, “two papers pre-sented  by  Conrad  and  Meyer,  one  on  methodology  and  the  other on the economics of slavery, provided a pseudo-manifes-to  for  the  Cliometrics  movement”  (Milonakis,  2006,  p.  281).  Although  in  the  first  place  after  the  Marginal  revolution,  the  historical element was considered improper in the formulation of abstract (neoclassical) principles, hereafter, through the cli-ometrics revolution, mainstream economics has reshaped the role of history rendering it a simple testing ground mechanism for  the  application  of  its  transhistorical  principles.  This  is  the  first manifestation of a new trend in social sciences that, after Becker (1976), came to be known as economic(s) imperialism (Fine 2002).Thus economic history was reunited with economic theory through  economics  imperialism.  The  importance  of  the  new  phenomenon is enhanced by cliometricians’ passion to reuni-fy  economic  theory  with  history,  as  opposed  to  the  “older  economic historians” who, according to them, had broken this organic linkage.11 Despite Fogel’s propagandistic stance, clio-metricians  promoted  the  re-fusion  of  theory  with  history  in  their own (neoclassical, quantitative, econometric) way, not by upgrading  the  role  of  the  historical  element  as  such,  but  by  downplaying the role of economic history proper. In this way they  impoverished  its  content  transforming  it  into  a  barren 
verifying  mechanism  of  the  theory’s  abstract  principles.  The  abstractness and transhistorical character of neoclassical doc-trines  impelled  cliometricians  to  ignore  and  downgrade  the  role  of  the  social  and  institutional  environment.  Such  negli-gence  inevitably  led  to  cliometricians  to  adjust  the  available  historical facts to fit with their a priori ontological hypotheses. According to McCloskey (1986, p. 67): “The rhetoric of statis-tics misleads the econometrician into thinking that by running a hyperplane through his beliefs about the statistics he is sub-jecting  his  beliefs  to  “test”.  But  he  is  not  testing  them,  as  he  can understand by recognizing how insignificant are his tests of significance but expressing them, telling them, fitting them to the crude facts, in a word, stimulating them”.This has led to a monolithic unification of economic history with economic theory through the colonisation of the former by  the  latter.  Thus,  if  in  (neoclassical)  Ashton’s  rhetoric  the  linkage  between  economic  theory  and  economic  history  should  be  strengthened,  in  Fogel’s  work,  economic  theory  colonised history. The epistemological developments in (neo-classical) economic theory’s corpus brought about the exten-sive use of econometrics in history and boar a new relationship between  economic  theory  and  history  (Cesarano,  2006,  p.  448). As Le Roy Ladurie (1981, pp. 26-27) has noted, “Clio had stolen the clothes of the social sciences while they were bath-ing, and they had never noticed their nakedness [...] History was, for a few decades of semi-disgrace, the Cinderella of the social  sciences”.  Generally,  in  the  cliometric  literature,  eco-nomic theory has thoroughly penetrated economic history, but in very limited (and secondary) areas have historical elements influenced economic theory (Lie, 2007, p. 5). In the mid-1970s Cliometrics had concluded its revolution-ary circle. As Field (1995, p. 1) observes: “The Cliometrics rev-olution is dead. By this, I mean that the banners under which new economic historians organized and made common cause with technically oriented theorists, econometricians, and oth-er  applied  economists  no  longer  have  the  ability  to  inspire  revolutionary  fervor  (especially  amongst  younger  recruits)  within economics departments”. The Cliometrics movement was constrained by its own epis-temic choices (e.g. neoclassical premises, extravagant “math-ematisation”, an extreme version of methodological individu-alism, etc.) and failed to promote an active dialogue between (economic) theory and history. Theoretically, the irrevocable product of their interaction was a one-way relationship that amounted to a vulgar version of economics’ imperialism.The main source of criticism apart from “old economic his-torians”  and  social  historians  (such  as  Marxism  or  Annales)  came from neoclassical economic historians who are referred to as newer and newest economic historians (Milonakis, 2006, p.  282).  These  historians  were  dissatisfied  with  neoclassical  theory’s epistemic weaknesses as applied to economic history and, while not rejecting the mainstream economic paradigm, they attempted to transform it. These (neoclassical) approach-es first to share the belief that the role of institutions is deter-minant in historical evolution and they doubt the main clio-metric  idea  that  the  totality  of  neoclassical  assumptions  is  completed  transhistorically.  But  that  as  it  may,  these  rap-prochements,  despite  their  adherence  either  to  the  role  of  information asymmetries or that of institutions, maintain the neoclassical  economic  theory’s  “hardcore”  –  the  assumption 
of rationality, the use of abstract models, and methodological individualism untouched. 
More specifically, the first wave of criticism within Cliometric economic history came from the “new information economics” of Stiglitz and Akerlof. Their contestation of the perfect informa-tion assumption rendered a new approach to economic history, which has been called newer economic history (Fine 2003; Milo-nakis and Fine 2009). Newer economic historians, including Lam-oreaux, Temin, Greif, and David, believe that the development of both  institutions  and  economic  policies  is  to  be  explained  through  the  existence  of  market  imperfections,  rooted  in  the  asymmetric distribution of information. These economic histo-rians, despite relaxing the assumption of perfect information, did not touch the main neoclassical premises, such as rational choice, (im)perfect competition, equilibrium, etc. Their progressive and liberal view of history has pushed them to undersign the transh-istorical nature of neoclassical epistemic references.A similar way of criticism was also developed by the newest economic history, and more specifically, with the work of Doug-lass North, Nobel laureate of 1993. As is well known, North at-tempted to utilise the main new institutionalist notions, such as transaction cost, asymmetries in competition, and information, in conjunction with a discernible theory of ideology and state. North’s epistemological contribution lies in his view that insti-tutions reduce transaction costs and “provide the organization-al foundation for production and exchange” (Marangos, 2002, p. 484).  His  inception  has  inevitably  brought  a  sense  of  “eclecti-cism” in its epistemological schemes promoting a new phase in economics imperialism (Fine and Milonakis, 2009; Meramveli-otakis  2020).  In  the  neoclassical  paradigm’s  modified  version,  promoted  by  North,  not  least,  though  not  exclusively,  through  his Structure and Change in Economic History (1981), despite the inarticulate  referrals  to  institutional,  ethical,  and  ideological  factors, the individualistic rational choice remains the raison d’ être of  his  account  of  historical  evolution.  Thus,  his  approach,  despite many references to structural and collective factors, re-flects a pure methodological individualism even in the way that structural environment is perceived: firstly, as something that is sublimely external to human action; and, secondly, as something that only bounds this action as evidenced by their reductionist employment by North as mere “constraints” on individual action (Marangos, 2002; Fine and Milonakis, 2003; Milonakis and Fine, 2007). His argument is consistent with his methodological indi-vidualist, rational choice, and comparative statics approach (Mi-lonakis, 2006, p. 286). North seems to apprehend only the first side of what Giddens has called the epistemological scheme of 
the duality of structure, and seems to ignore the other (reverse) side, that of the “activating” role of structures and the posture that they represent the product of human agency. Lloyd (1986, pp. 235-236) is right when he notes that North’s analysis “would have been improved if he had abandoned the neo-classical in-dividualist remnants left within it and developed the structura-tionist elements that are implicit there”. In fine, North’s general epistemic pillars, the neoclassical ontological assumptions, his belief in a Hobbesian notion of the state, his theory of ideology and  property  rights,  did  not  help  in  promoting  the  (organic)  linkages between economic theory and history given the tran-shistorical content of the latter but has instead opened the way for a new (covered) phase in economics imperialism.
5. Theory in history: A comment Moreover, the use of theoretical schemas was for centuries an unthinkable practice in historiography. The early pioneers 
of  narrative  history,  or  histoire  evenementielle,  as  Francois  Simiand and Paul Lacombe, called it, represent the first for-mal (mainstream) paradigm in historiography during the first decades of the nineteenth century that brought about preg-nant  epistemic  enunciations.  Leopold  von  Ranke’s  famous  phrase “Wie es eigentlich gewesen” —to show as it had been— jointly  with  its  “philosophically”  shallow  epistemological  counterpart, of “letting the facts speak for themselves”, had produced  a  specific  (epistemological)  outline  for  the  con-quest of historical truth. Such epistemic choices had pervad-ed  the  paradigm’s  “hardcore”  providing  a  positivistic  per-spective according to which the knowledge of the economic past is tantamount as the sum summarum of all sense obser-vations.Historians who accepted these epistemic positions promot-ed plain empiricism in history according to which, “all knowl-edge  is  reducible  to  atomic  propositions  that  correspond  to  discrete  impressions,  sense  data  and  the  like”  (McLennan,  1981, p. 30). Focusing on the uniqueness of facts they promot-ed the view that knowledge is to be derived by human senses only, and not by the use of any (abstract) theoretical schema, “legitimatising”  in  this  way  a  (narrative)  political  version  of  history (“political history”). This drift in historiography’s his-tory was in reality favoured by a dual process: initially, by the general opening of state archives, which was a revolutionary act  in  the  late  eighteenth  century;  and  subsequently  by  the  (methodological)  legitimation  of  a  royalist  methodological  individualism, which promoted the “narration” and accorded 
analytical primacy to the deeds of “great men” (kings, princes, generals, etc.)12. Thus, the “mainstream historiographical par-adigm” remained descriptive, without any interpretative and analytical depth, being substantially an unfolded form of “nar-ration”.  So,  the  general  “scientific  inflorescence”  recorded  in  the “long” nineteenth century does not manage to penetrate historiography (Iggers, 1991; Hobsbawm, 1999). Historiogra-phy, despite its early “academisation” in the early nineteenth century, had lapsed into intellectual disrepute, being based on Rankean (narrative) epistemic premises. This narrative type of historiography contrasts sharply with the “philosophical his-tory” of the Scottish Enlightenment, the adherents of which, despite  their  asthenic  relation  with  the  notion  of  “fact”,  had  attempted  to  perceive  reality  in  deeper  and  more  holistic  terms. The hermeneutic inadequacies of the “narrative historio-graphical  paradigm”  pushed  it  into  an  intellectual  crisis,  which has been eloquently described in the eleventh edition of Encyclopedia Britannica (1910). This celebrated edition de-scribed  the  necessity  for  an  approach  to  history  systemati-cally  different  from  the  classical  Rankean  one  (Hobsbawm,  1999,  p.  96).  The  use  of  general  theoretical  schemas  is  im-pregnable since each historical fact is theoretically charged13. However, the role of the narrative stage historiography was crucial in determining the gap between theory and history.
6.  ConclusionEssentially, therefore, the developments in historiography, during the “long nineteenth century”, prepared the territory for the disjunction between abstract economic reasoning and history, which was propelled during the eve of the Marginal Revolution. The result of this twin process was the total rejec-tion of economic theory for the interpretation of the econom-ic past. The transition from the political economy to economics was decisive. The structural transformation in economic sci-ence (and the subsequent emergence of neoclassical econom-ic theory) deprived economic historians of the potentiality to borrow, use, and transform economic theory’s abstract sche-mas. Static and timeless rapprochements, like that of the ne-oclassical economic paradigm, are inappropriate for the theo-risation of the economic past due to their failure to incorporate the role of time and change in the analysis. The short history of Cliometrica evidences this view. What is necessary is a the-ory with a dynamic character, which will contain a sub-theory of transformation, to come to terms with the transitory periods in  historical  evolution.  Such  a  theory  ought  to  be  “realist”,  “critical”, and “modern”, namely a histoire raisonnée, so that it can explain the deeper (and dynamic) processes of the multi-farious economic past. In sum, “History is theory. Or rather the only economic theory that can possibly be valid is a theory of economic history” (Wallerstein, 1991, p. 174).